---
title: "Universal Adaptive Environment Discovery"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2025-10-14-uaed
excerpt: ''
date: 2025-10-14
venue: 'ArXiv'
citation: 'Matymov Madi; <b>Tran, Ba-Hien</b>; Filippone, Maurizio. Universal Adaptive Environment Discovery. ArXiv preprint, 2025.'


---
An open problem in Machine Learning is how to avoid models to exploit spurious correlations in the data; a famous example is the background-label shortcut in the Waterbirds dataset. A common remedy is to train a model across multiple environments; in the Waterbirds dataset, this corresponds to training by randomizing the background. However, selecting the right environments is a challenging problem, given that these are rarely known a priori. We propose Universal Adaptive Environment Discovery (UAED), a unified framework that learns a distribution over data transformations that instantiate environments, and optimizes any robust objective averaged over this learned distribution. UAED yields adaptive variants of IRM, REx, GroupDRO, and CORAL without predefined groups or manual environment design. We provide a theoretical analysis by providing PAC-Bayes bounds and by showing robustness to test environment distributions under standard conditions. Empirically, UAED discovers interpretable environment distributions and improves worst-case accuracy on standard benchmarks, while remaining competitive on mean accuracy. Our results indicate that making environments adaptive is a practical route to out-of-distribution generalization.
[Download paper here](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2510.12547)
